Among government funding mechanisms, property taxes loom large. Like other kinds of taxes, levies on property are generally structured as a rate that is charged against the underlying value being taxed. In the case of property taxes, that rate is assessed against the value of the property in question. For example, a local government might set a rate of .1% which would create a tax liability of $400 against a home worth $400,000. Importantly, the general structure of such taxes is to set the tax rate directly just like is done with a sales tax or an income tax.

In the case of property however, this structure creates a subtle problem. Property, particularly real property, tends to appreciate in value over time. Mostly, this is a good thing for the owner of the property since they can leverage the appreciated value for whatever purposes they deem worthwhile. They might borrow against the higher value, liquidate it by selling the property, or benefit from a number of other more complex financial products. However, in the event that the owner prioritizes retaining ownership of their property, such as when a homeowner chooses to keep their house after the mortgage is paid off, a property tax which is structured as an explicit policy rate creates a situation wherein the tax liability continually increases as the property appreciates in value.

This can be problematic for two reasons. First, it in effect raises taxes on a regular basis. The reason being that with a fixed rate, tax burden rises as value appreciates. If the home from the previous example were to increase in value to $500,000, the tax on it would rise to $500. This is different from something like a sales tax where, when the rate is held constant, aggregate liability would rise due to an individual choosing to increase consumption. With property taxes, fixed rates cause tax liability to increase almost automatically. Second, in general over a life, an individual's wealth increases over time until an inflection point where one's wealth begins declining. This pattern is driven by individuals on net building wealth over the early and middle decades of life by earning income and accumulating assets, and drawing down that wealth in the decades following retirement. As a consequence, there comes a point in the typical wealth profile where one's ability to pay increasing property tax liability diminishes at the same time that tax burden continues increasing due to value appreciation.

In recognition of these issues, Utah structures property taxes differently by making a small but critical change. First enacted in the 1985 general session with the [Tax Increase Disclosure Act (HB 388)](https://images.archives.utah.gov/digital/collection/432n/id/121707/rec/6), a process called 'Truth in Taxation' constrains property taxes at all levels of government. It takes the ordinary tax paradigm and flips it on its head. The basic concept behind Truth in Taxation is to set the _revenue to be raised_, rather than setting the _rate to charge_. More specifically, property tax rates float up and down in response to changes in the underlying taxable value in order to maintain the same revenue year-to-year. At a basic level, this floating action is achieved by summing all the taxable property within a district and computing a tax rate which would generate the same revenue as the prior year. As such, if the aggregate value of property within a district increases, then the applied tax rate would decrease in response and vice versa.

Truth in Taxation has several obvious advantages over a rate-based system. First, residents do not need to bear increases in their tax liability merely because their property increased in value. Instead, Truth in Taxation aims at keeping one's tax liability constant or near constant year-to-year. This is not always accomplished perfectly due to complexities in the administration and dynamics within the underlying tax base. Second, it increases transparency and accountability in local taxation. It does this by requiring that any proposed increase in tax on residents must be explicitly approved by a legislative body with reasonable opportunity for input from the public. Under a rate-based system by contrast, increases in tax liability would occur near automatically due to increases in property values with no opportunity for public debate on if the increased revenue was warranted or not. Third, it provides stability for both taxpayers and local governments. For taxpayers, Truth in Taxation ensures that one's tax liability does not swing sharply from year to year merely due to fluctuations or trends in the real estate market. As such, they can be assured that their liability will be relatively constant year-to-year, and any substantial increases will come with ample notice. For local governments, it ensures that they can count on steady revenues when budgeting rather than worrying about the risk of property values changing suddenly in the event of an economic shock. Consequently, local governments face relatively smaller ranges of uncertainty when assessing their financial needs and planning how to provide services to their residents.
