# To Truth or not to Truth: Truth-in-Taxation Explained

Among government funding streams, property taxes loom large. Like other kinds of taxes, levies on property are generally strucutred as a rate that is charged against the underlying value being taxed. In the case of property taxes, that rate is assessed against the value of the property in question. For example, a local government might set a rate of .001% which would create a tax lability of $400 against a home worth $400,000. Importantly, the general strucutre of such taxes is to set the tax rate directly just like is done with a sales tax or an income tax.

In the case of property however, this structure creates a subtle problem. Property, particularly real property, has a habit of appriciating in value. Mostly, this is a good thing for the owner of the property since they can leverage the appriciated value for whatever purposes they deem worthwhile. They might borrow against the higher value, liquidate it by selling the property, or benefit from a number of other more complex financial products. However, in the event that the owner does not wish to part with their property for whatever reason, such as wanting to continue living in the house that they have owned for decades, a property tax which is strucutred as an explict policy rate creates a situation wherein the tax liabilty continutly increases as the property apprciates in value.

This can be problematic for two reasons. First, it in effect raises taxes on a regular basis. The reason being that with a fixed rate, tax burden rises as value appriciates. If the home from the previous example were to increase in value to $500,000, the tax on it would rise to $500. This is different from something like a sale tax where, when the rate is held constant, aggregate liabilty would rise due to an individual choosing to increase consumption. With property taxes, fixed rates cause tax liabilty to increase almost automatically. Second, in general, the pattern of wealth over an individual's life is for it to increase with time until an inflection point where one's wealth begins declining. This pattern is driven by individuals on net building wealth over the early and middle decades of life by earning income and accumulating assests, and drawing down that wealth in the decades follwing retirement. As a consequence, there comes a point in the typical wealth profile where one's ability to pay increasing property tax liability diminishes at the same time that tax burden continues increasing due to value appriciation.

Here in Utah however, we do things a little bit differntly. First enacted in the 1985 general session with the [Tax Increase Disclosure Act (HB 388)](https://images.archives.utah.gov/digital/collection/432n/id/121707/rec/6), a process called 'Truth in Taxation contrains property taxes at all levels of government.' It takes the ordinary tax paradigm and flips it on its head. The basic concept behind Truth in Taxation is to set the revenue to be raised, rather than setting the rate to charge. More specifically, property tax rates are explicitly strucutred to float up and down in response to changes in the underlying taxable valuein order to maintain the same revenue year-to-year. At a basic level, this floating action is achived by summing all the taxable property within a district and computing a tax rate which would generate the same revenue as the prior year. As such, if the aggregate value of property within a district increases, then the applied tax rate would decrease in response and vice versa.

The structure of Truth in Taxation begs an obvious question: if the system enforces flat revenues year-to-year, how is a taxing entity supposed to maintain services in the face of rising costs? After all, governments are not immune to inflation or other economic trends. Moreover, what if a taxing entity wants to increase the quality or quantity of services provided to its resident such as when a school district needs to hire more teachers as the population of school-age children grows? How are such services meant to be funded? Enforced flat revenues by themselves cannot meet theses needs.

Truth in Taxation contains a process for a taxing entity to raise the level of revnues it collects. In other words, under Truth in Taxation, taxing entities retain the ability to raise taxes. In order to do that, an entity must send a notification to residents of the proposed tax increase, how much that tax increase would cost the taxpayer, and how that costs compare to the tax liability from the prior year. Following the notification, the entity must hold a public meeting wherein residents are afforded the oppertunity to provide comment on the proposal. After that, then and only then can a taxing entity take action to officially raise the level of revenue that they collect.

Truth in Taxation has several obvious advantages over a rate-based system. First, residents do not need to bear increases in their tax liabiliy merely becasue their property increased in value. Instead, Truth in Taxation aims at keeping one's tax liability constant or near constant year-to-year. This is not always accomplished perfectly due to complexities in the administration and application of the process, but the growth in tax liabilty is systematicly lower than it would be under a rate-based system. Second, it increases transpanacy and accountability in local taxation. It does this by requiring that any proposed increase in tax on residents must be explicilty approved by a legislative body with reasonable oppertunity for input from the public. Under a rate-based system by contrast, increases in tax liabilty would occur near automatically due to increases in property values with no oppertunity for public debate on if the increased revnue was warrented or not. Third, it provides stability for both taxpayers and local governments. For taxpayers, Truth in Taxation ensures that one's tax liability does not swing sharply from year to year merely due to fluctuations or trends in the real estate market. As such, they can be assured that their liability will be relativly constant year-to-year, and any substatial increases will come with ample notice. For local governments, it ensures that they can count on steady revenues when budgeting rather than worrying about the risk of property values changing suddenly in the event of an economic shock. Consequenlty, local governments face relativly smaller ranges of uncertanty when assessing their financial needs and planning how to provide services to their residents.
